Start with data stream lifecycle documentation (#95326)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/data-streams/lifecycle/tutorial-manage-existing-data-stream.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[tutorial-manage-existing-data-stream]]
=== Tutorial: Update existing data stream

preview::[]

> To update the lifecycle of an existing data stream you do following actions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To update the lifecycle of an existing data stream you do the following actions:
```

. <<set-lifecycle>>
. <<delete-lifecycle>>

[discrete]
[[set-lifecycle]]
==== Set a data stream's lifecycle

To add or to change the retention period of your data stream you can use the <<data-streams-put-lifecycle, PUT lifecycle API>>.

* You can set infinite retention period, meaning that your data should never be deleted. For example:
+
[source,console]
----
PUT _data_stream/my-data-stream/_lifecycle
{ } <1>
----
// TEST[setup:my_data_stream]
<1> An empty payload means that your data stream is still managed but the data will never be deleted. Managing a time
series data stream such as logs or metrics enables {es} to better store your data even if you do not use a retention period.

> * Or you can set the retention period of your choice. For example:

Reviewer: Do we indicate somewhere what values are allowed for the data_retention? What is the minimum, maximum, and the format etc?

Author: Hm, no we haven't, not explicitly at least, it's in the examples. Do you think we should add this?

+
[source,console]
----
PUT _data_stream/my-data-stream/_lifecycle
{
  "data_retention": "30d" <1>
}
----
// TEST[continued]
<1> The retention period of this data stream is set to 30 days. This means that {es} is allowed to delete data that is
older than 30 days at its own discretion.

The changes in the lifecycle are applied on all backing indices of the data stream. You can see the effect of the change
via the <<data-streams-explain-lifecycle, explain API>>:

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------

> GET .ds-my-data-stream-*/_lifecycle/explain

Reviewer 2: This can use the data stream name itself, which would be less confusing
```suggestion
GET /my-data-stream/_lifecycle/explain
```

Author: I like the idea but currently this is not supported. I will create an enhancement issue for this.

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "indices": {
    ".ds-my-data-stream-2023.04.19-000002": {
      "index": ".ds-my-data-stream-2023.04.19-000002",  <1>
      "managed_by_lifecycle": true,                           <2>
      "index_creation_date_millis": 1681919221417,
      "time_since_index_creation": "6.85s",             <3>
      "lifecycle": {
        "data_retention": "30d"                         <4>
      }
    },
    ".ds-my-data-stream-2023.04.17-000001": {
      "index": ".ds-my-data-stream-2023.04.17-000001",  <5>
      "managed_by_lifecycle": true,                           <6>
      "index_creation_date_millis": 1681745209501,
      "time_since_index_creation": "48d",               <7>
      "rollover_date_millis": 1681919221419,
      "time_since_rollover": "6.84s",                   <8>
      "generation_time": "6.84s",                       <9>
      "lifecycle": {
        "data_retention": "30d"                         <10>
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]
// TESTRESPONSE[skip:the result is for illustrating purposes only]
<1> The name of the backing index.

> <2> This index is managed by the built-in data stream lifecycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> This index is managed by a data stream lifecycle.
```

I don't think we should use "built-in" since it has too much meaning

<3> The time that has passed since this index has been created.
<4> The data retention for this index is at least 30 days, as it was recently updated.
<5> The name of the backing index.
<6> This index is managed by the built-in data stream lifecycle.
<7> The time that has passed since this index has been created.
<8> The time that has passed since this index was <<index-rollover,rolled over>>.
<9> The time that will be used to determine when it's safe to delete this index and all its data.
<10> The data retention for this index as well is at least 30 days, as it was recently updated.

[discrete]
[[delete-lifecycle]]
==== Remove lifecycle for a data stream

> To remove the lifecycle of a data stream you can use the <<data-streams-delete-lifecycle-request,delete lifecycle API>>, as consequence,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To remove the lifecycle of a data stream you can use the <<data-streams-delete-lifecycle-request,delete lifecycle API>>. As consequence,
```

the maintainance operations that were applied by the lifecycle will no longer be applied to the data stream and all its

> backing indices will. For example:

Reviewer: "backing indices will" what?

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
DELETE _data_stream/my-data-stream/_lifecycle
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

You can then use the <<data-streams-explain-lifecycle, explain API>> again to see that the indices are no longer managed.

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------

> GET .ds-my-data-stream-*/_lifecycle/explain

Reviewer 2: Same thing here about using
```suggestion
GET /my-data-stream/_lifecycle/explain
```
